[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Tantra is a spiritual
technology aimed at radical
transformation of one's
experience of oneself
and the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Though one of the world's
most influential and remarkable
spiritual traditions,
almost no one--
including many
who teach Tantra--
completely understand
this extremely diverse
Indian spiritual tradition.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The whole practice, it's
difficult to sum up in simple
terms.
But when it comes
to Tantric yoga,
it's involving all
parts of and awareness
of all the different layers
and facets of our being.
It dissolves the
false boundaries
between spiritual and worldly.
And spiritual practice
and worldly life
get intimately intertwined.
And it's not a coincidence
that the word "Tantra" also
means a loom, for interweaving
different kinds of cloth.
>> According to Tantra, all that
is found in the cosmos can be
found within each individual.
Therefore, the same principles
that apply to the universe,
apply to the individual being.
By weaving various rituals
and inner practices,
Tantra seeks to
balance, not renounce,
human instincts in order
to reach enlightenment.
>> There's a view that I
am Brahman, I am the vine,
I am God--
philosophical God, not the
controller of everything.
Tantra holds that God has become
everything, not that I am God.
So all we have to do
is think of the divine,
but it's not that easy.
>> The goal of
Tantra is twofold--
simultaneously awakening to
the true nature of reality
as a whole and also
becoming radically free
of all forms of
mind-created suffering.
Becoming radically
free of the experience
of bondage and limitation.
>> It is, perhaps, this idea of
being radically free that has
mistakenly identified
Tantra as the yoga of sex.
>> A lot of times, these days,
people think that Tantra just
has to do with sex and
actually, that's not the case.
That Tantra is a science.
It's actually-- we could even
say it's a religion itself.
And it's very difficult
to even trace fully or say
how far back its roots go.
>> It's a very subtle science.
And the West-- the
West plays around
with these concepts in
primarily, in an occult way.
Starting with Pierre Bernard
in 1900 in San Francisco,
and Aleister Crowley in
England, and a few other folks,
but those are two
of the main ones.
They were teaching
something they called
"Sex Magick" or Tantric sex.
And there was no real connection
to the original tradition,
except for the fact that the
sexual practices that they came
up with were sometimes
overlaid with relatively
vague pronouncements from the
Indian spiritual tradition.
Literally, hundreds
of millions of people
have heard Sting use the
word Tantra in association
with things like prolonged
orgasms and increased
intimacy with one's life
partner or sexual partner.
And so that, of
course, is emblazoned
on everyone's imagination.
The original Tantric tradition
has no sexual techniques
at all.
The most important
thing for people
to get to make sense of this
incredibly complex yoga Tantra
traditions-- they're
lineage-based.
And you can not make
sense of them as a whole
because that's not
how they ever worked.
It's about the energy
coming through the lineage.
>> The passing of Yogic
knowledge from teacher
to student, from generation
to generation over thousands
of years is a sacred
undertaking for all Yogic paths.
And it is within these
lineages that the diversity
of practicing Tantra
really shows up.
>> There are many different
streams within Tantra
and that's where we get
these different lineages.
It is more complex than
just what it's been made out
or what it's been
presented to be.
And I think it's very
important that we
know the different
lineages or at least,
are familiar because each has
something different to offer.
>> The one distinction all
Tantra practices share,
however, is the very intentional
break from yoga's ascetic
traditions.
>> The most prominent
distinguishing feature
of Tantra is that it was
designed for householders.
A lot of people don't realize
that Patanjali's "Yoga-Sutra"
was written for and intended for
Brahmin men who had renounced
worldly life and were doing
full-time ascetic Yogic
practice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So along comes Tantra,
about 1,500 years ago.
And that is a movement
of inclusivity
that radically challenged
some of the basic assumptions
because people up to that point
assumed that yoga could only
be done by a
renuncient-- someone who
had renounced family,
job, money, and sex.
And Tantra is for people who
hadn't renounced those things.
In fact, Tantric
yoga is the only form
of yoga specifically
designed for people who
hadn't renounced those things.
Who were engaged in the world.
And who had families,
and jobs, and so on.
So the teachings and
practices are quite distinct.
So all the Tantric texts,
and all the oral teachings,
the whole tradition really
covers four basic topics.
Wisdom teachings or spiritual
knowledge-- insight.
Lifestyle-- Yogic lifestyle,
daily life observances
that are in alignment
with and support
our spiritual development.
Yoga, which consists of
meditation, energy body
practice, awareness cultivation.
So in Tantra, most
yoga is inner yoga.
And then the fourth is ritual.
>> Modern Tantra can be
distilled into two main
approaches.
>> Some may be more of a fierce
or a left-handed path using
what is so-called
taboo in our culture,
even using sexual practices
or other substances.
Others would be
more right-handed,
having to do more
with visualization,
and more interior
experiences, or bridging
the external and internal.
>> The left-handed path involves
extreme spiritual practices
that deliberately run counter
to conventional social behavior.
Though these tend to be
practiced by smaller fringe
groups, their wild ways add
to the mystique of Tantra.
>> There are definitely
left-handed paths like
the Aghori path.
Or also, an earlier string--
the Kapalikas-- that
are doing practices in
the cremation grounds.
And they appear to
be very grotesque,
but it's really
this understanding
that the divine is everything.
The divine is
ultimately, impartial.
And while there are
practitioners that literally
go to a cremation
ground and maybe are
working with corpses or with
the spirits of that place
to overcome certain
fears, it's also
an opportunity to look
at our attachments
to this material reality.
>> Part of what Aghori is
really about is this intimate
engagement with mortality and
with the whole cycle of life,
such as taking your food and
drink out of a human skull.
And traditionally included,
wearing bone ornaments--
human bone ornaments-- some
of which were also sexual.
A lot of which,
though, were mortuary--
meaning encountering death in
the most visceral way, really.
Simply encountering
death in a visceral way
is spiritually powerful.
Because in our culture--
as many other Western
European cultures-- death
is hidden, sanitized as
much as humanly possible.
There's no visceral
encounter with it at all.
And I think that's a huge
problem, actually, spiritually
because if you don't have a
visceral encounter with death,
you don't seriously believe
it's going to happen to you.
Right-handed Tantra is much,
much closer to non-Tantric
forms of yoga like what we see
in Patanjali's "Yoga-Sutra."
Right-handed Tantra
is much more oriented
towards transcendentalistic
experiences.
And it's much less embracing
of the full range of energy.
The other distinguishing
feature of it as a tradition
is its veneration
of the feminine.
So the role of the
divine feminine
is absolutely central in Tantra
and not in other forms of yoga.
>> Most Tantric practice
focuses on Shakti--
the feminine.
And we call that Shaktis
or Shaktism that give
precedence to the
feminine power aspect.
In Tantra, we have a term
called [NON-ENGLISH]..
[NON-ENGLISH] is that unitive of
experience of Shiva and Shakti
uniting.
This Tantric
worldview of the one
becoming many through
the power of Shakti
through the divine mother
manifesting as everything.
And so if that's true of
the universal manifestation,
it's also true of our little
individual manifestation.
>> In Tantra, there's a
word called [NON-ENGLISH]..
[NON-ENGLISH] meaning the
manifested cosmic womb.
Before anything comes
into manifestation,
it exists in an
unmanifested state.
The manifest reality is
primarily, first feminine.
From that is more both
masculine and feminine.
We never say Father Nature,
it's always Mother Nature.
It's mother country,
its mother tongue.
It has a feminine quality to it.
>> A yogini is a practitioner,
and an attendant,
and devotee of goddess herself.
The practices that
she engages in
are really about
marrying or understanding
the relationship between the
absolute and the relative,
which translates to our
everyday experiences.
So she does different practices
using Tantric techniques,
mantras so chanting, yantra,
different visualizations,
or meditation techniques.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The yogini's
themselves really came
about between the
8th, 9th centuries
and the 16th centuries
of the Common Era.
>> In the beginning times, there
were a lot of temples dedicated
to the divine feminine because
a lot of practices were based
around that.
>> Yogini temples are
circular, open to the sky,
and sacred to several
forms of the goddess.
>> There aren't
many yogini temples.
The period that
they were built--
between the 8th and
the 16th century--
maybe have 10 to 14 temples
that were only discovered
as recently as the 1950s.
And each of the temples
is open to the sky
so that also warrants is a
question of, well, what's
happening?
Why are they open?
What are they practicing?
Are they taking flight at night?
Is it through the use,
maybe, of altered substances?
Is it their ritual practice?
Is it related even to this
expansion of consciousness?
It's really about cultivating,
deepening our relationship
with the divine in
many, many forms.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Another Tantric practice
utilizing divine feminine
energy is Kundalini rising.
Kundalini is a Sanskrit word
used for thousands of years
to describe life
force energy or prana.
>> In Tantra and yoga, we
sometime have the idea that we
have a power at the base of
the spine called Kundalini.
That is actually the
divine mother's form.
Kula Kundalini is
Shakti, it's Kali's form.
The mantra says [NON-ENGLISH],,
that she exists in the fire pit
of consciousness at
the base of the spine.
And so the whole
process of Tantric yoga
is to awaken Kundalini and bring
it back to union with her lord.
>> The path of Kundalini Rising
brings one's self up into these
wonderful encounters in the
Yoga Sutra, it says, you ascend,
and you make connection with
these saints that have gone
before, and then the
breath continues.
And there must be the return
to the place of encounter.
The return to the
place of heart.
>> The purpose of ritual in
Tantra is for you to attune
yourself to those archetype
aspects of nature,
because they are ultimately
a reflection of you.
When you start using the
mantras, specific chants,
specific taranas,
what you are doing
is you are opening yourself,
your consciousness,
and you're making it receptive
to that aspect of nature.
>> So Tantra is a highly
ritualized tradition,
but it approaches ritual in a
very different way from most
religions.
So in non-dual Tantra, when
you are performing a ritual,
you're not trying to win the
favor of some external deity.
And it's not like you're
trying to accomplish
some magical goal.
Rather, you're cultivating
awareness in action.
And this practice
culminates in the experience
that ritual is nothing other
than God worshipping God on God
by means of God for
the sake of God alone.
>> Some focus on fire, some
focus on its power to burn.
The goddess worshippers
or the chakras
would focus on its
energetic manifestation.
In the ritual that
they're doing are
based upon Tantric
forms of worship,
and they're using
mantra, they're
using mudras, hand gestures,
and physical offerings--
worshipping images and yantras.
>> A yantra is a geometrical
pattern made of several
concentric figures, squares,
circles, lotuses, triangles,
and points.
It is the Yogic equivalent
of the Buddhist mandala.
>> The Tantric yantras are
essentially meditation devices,
and you see them on the petals--
seven or eight petals
of the lotus flower--
and they each represent a
different afflicted emotion.
>> Often they'll have a yantra--
a geometric form that's
supposed to embody the deity--
and it has a mantra, a word,
or a name, or a series of names
and sounds, that
have that same power.
And so by meditating on
the image or the yantra
while repeating the mantra--
that contact connection--
that's the primary practice.
Generally speaking,
the mantras are--
can't say they're secret--
but they're private.
They are something that's
whispered from mouth to ear,
passed down from guru
to disciple and teacher
to student through
oral transmissions
or oral tradition,
through lineage.
There are mantra that are
kind of universally known,
like [NON ENGLISH SPEECH]
or the Hare Krishna mantra.
Then some mantras will
be based upon a name,
like Shiva or Krishna.
So mantras will have more
esoteric sounds that have more
affect than they have meaning.
>> When tantra and
mantra combine together,
you become yantra.
Yantra means the machine.
You have the tool to
go past into your past
or into your future.
The perfection of this
process is known patandra.
Once you have gone
beyond the perfection
and you become the
master of this process,
you are known as sutundra
which means freedom.
>> Tantric rituals always
include one of the Earth's five
basic elements.
>> The rituals were designed
to balance the elements.
Use all the elements,
balance the elements--
sound, light, water, fire--
all the elements are used
with specific intention.
Especially with the fire, fire
is one of the most hypnotic
of the elements.
And you're using the
mantras, so you're
creating a deep
hypnosis, and then
you're introducing
your intention.
Then your intention
has more of a chance
to get into your subconscious.
>> Sometimes tantra is described
as a path of fire and water.
Exploring fire, whether
it's literal fire,
that tremendous heat, the
tremendous transformation,
the challenges that these
practices can bring,
or the path of
water because we're
working with the emotions.
But also, this understanding
that we have this physical form
and then we also have
the energetic body.
>> Puja is a simple way of
expressing devotion and service
to a very respected guest.
Almost every temple you go to
the Pujas that they're doing,
the ritual that you're
doing, are based
upon Tantric forms of worship.
They say in idea that
[NON ENGLISH SPEECH]
a guest is God.
Even a common guest is god.
The elaborate Pujas
can take hours,
and they're very complicated.
Usually require years
of training to do.
Certain monks and
priests and juries
are expert and trained
in these rituals.
And as a result, most
common people won't learn.
It's not easy.
So they'll often hire a priest
to do the ritual in their name.
And the most simple
form that's universally
practiced in every temple
and in most homes is Aarti.
And Aarti means the
waving of lights.
And when the image-- when the
light is waved at the feet,
you'd see the feet.
When it's waved at the
head, you'd feed the head.
So you'd actually show
the deity with the light.
So the lights are the
primary thing that's offered,
but then usually we're offering
those five elements that make
up creation back to its source.
In ritual way-- by ringing a
bell, we're offering the light,
we're offering light means fire.
The conch full of
water is water.
Cloth represents space
that covers everything.
The flower represents earth--
fragrance of the Earth.
And the fan represents air.
So these five items are
offered with the idea
that the foundations
of the entire universe
are being offered
back to their source.
So in a simple ritual
devotional form,
it's also representing
the ultimate goal
of Kundalini raising or
that supreme experience
of universal awareness.
It's the goal ritualized
as a daily practice.
>> All of this nourishes
all the senses while engaged
in movements--
ritual movements--
which are memorized so you're
not having to think about what
to do next.
Rather, you can immerse
in awareness of the whole
as you're engaging in
these ritual actions.
Ritual achieves its
culmination when
that's your experience,
not the thought,
but the direct experience.
So ritual is a kind
of celebration.
It is the one celebrating
itself in all the modes
of the different senses.
>> While the Tantric tradition
offers many different
and diverse practices depending
on an individual's need
and life, it is by design that
its deepest meaning remains
hidden.
>> There's actually a very good
and specific reason that people
have a hard time really
getting what Tantra is,
and that's because it's
an initiate tradition,
meaning to say, you're not
supposed to get what it is
until you're actually being
initiated into the practice
of it.
So in the West, we've
developed a culture
of know In order to do.
Tell me all about this
thing, and then I'll
know whether I want to do it.
But that is not the
culture of pre-modern India
or Asia, which was
more of a, do in order
to know culture where
you explore something
experientially,
and that gives rise
to insights and knowledge and
understanding-- experiential
understanding.
So a lot of traditional
Tantra teachers
maintain that sort of
shroud of secrecy--
that you're not
going to know what
this is, and you can't know
what it is unless you actually
want to do it, unless you
actually want to give it a try.
And then, you're going
to start to experience
what it is in a way that
your mind can't categorize
or conceptualize.
>> So temples, images,
yantras, mantras, kirtan--
all these things are designed
to help us think, remember
God, who is the only reality.
So people visit
temples regularly,
they go on pilgrimages yearly.
And daily, they
have a little shrine
in a little corner
in their house.
Every day they do
their prayers and they
offer some flowers, some
sweets, they burn some incense.
It's such a simple thing
that maybe it does nothing,
but it's a huge
thing, because you're
remembering the infinite.
By making God the
center of your house,
you can make God the
center of your day.
Slowly, you can make God
the center of your life.
And that is ultimately the goal.
>> Tantra teaches how to engage
with all the aspects of worldly
life--
so your sexuality,
the way you relate
to food, your relationships,
and everything
else-- it's all part of
the spiritual practice.
>> That's why Tantra is
ultimately dropping all
projections and experiencing
the meaning of life,
which cannot be contained
in any ideology.
That's why yoga is
not an ideology.
For me it's an invitation
to the meaning of life.
>> In our next episode, Raja
yoga aims at learning how
to control our mind so we
can become, essentially,
kings of kings or
queens of queens--
masters of our own mind, rather
than victims of our mind.
>> That subtle stuff that we
call consciousness or awareness
or godliness, it's
radically creative.
>> You are much more
receptive, much more relaxed.
People are too wound up, man.
They're too stressed.
They're too self-important.
My purpose, my purpose.
You have no purpose.
Be quiet for a while.